Add post: distinction-drawer (#7)
guillaumewuip/guillaumewuip.github.io: _posts/2021-02-23-distinction-drawer.md

---
title: Distinction Drawer 

draft: false

page : false

image: 

excerpt: What it means to be a distinction-drawer in software engineering?

---

Earlier this week Martin Fowler revealed who he was all along. Turns out, he
[sees himself as a "distinction
drawer"](https://twitter.com/martinfowler/status/1363847064317263876?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw)
in software. The confession immediately clicked for me. I realised that being in
this distinction-drawer mode is something I like a lot in my job as a software
engineer.

What does it mean to be in distinction-drawer mode?

We're in this distinction-drawer mode when we take a step back from the day to
day activity of writing code and start reasoning about what we're doing. While
doing so, we see our current bit of code as a tiny cog distinct from other parts
of the larger machine. We're thinking "meta". 

When we're writing specs for a new feature, using our knowledge to articulate
how this feature could be built upon multiple logical parts of the codebase

> talking to each other, we're also in this distincting-drawer mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
talking to each other, we're also in this distinction-drawer mode.
```

What logical distinctions can we draw? How do we combine things with one
another? How do we avoid making false equivalencies? What are the fundamental
responsibilities at play? What concepts should we bring together to reach our
goal? Making strong, identified distinctions will help us build a strong new
feature, but it will also enable us to preserve the "machine" as well.

Imagine a gardener having to plant a new flower, stepping back from the
flowerbed to decide what's the next step. Where will the flower go? And why
there? To answer that without relying only on a possibly flawed intuition, the
gardener uses years of previous experiences as well as the general rules of
gardening.

> This moment of thought, this step back, has a purpose. It enables the gardner to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This moment of thought, this step back, has a purpose. It enables the gardener to
```

technical discussion we had, common patterns we've seen over the years working
on different codebases to understand better what is at stake in what we're
doing. It is actual work, maybe the most important part of it even.

It's [seeking the
truth](https://twitter.com/ericnormand/status/1313854365741076480). We're
bringing concepts and models on the table to reason from [first
principles](https://jamesclear.com/first-principles).

Doing so, we try to find the fundamentals principles hidden behind our code. We
reason about responsibilities and boundaries. Where is the code [dealing with
*state*](http://localhost:4000/tech/posts/2020-11-22-state-store-in-frontend-codebases)?
How do we *store* data? When are we doing *requests* to other services? How to
represent *permissions*? What is the responsibility of the *view*?

We're distinguishing logical parts from each other, forming a modularised
picture in our head (and at one point on paper, hopefully) where each part has a
clear and strong role.

Coming back to our code with such a picture in mind helps us better articulate
what we're doing. We now know *this thing* should be put *here*, but *this other

> thing* should be done *here* and we know how to explain it to our colleagues. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thing* should be done *there* and we know how to explain it to our colleagues. It
```

looks like nothing but it's extremely powerful.

Sometimes it's real Eureka! moments.

A lot could probably be added on this curious topic. Can someone always be in
distinction-drawer mode, disconnected from the raw, immediate code?  Which
resources can be used to grow such a mindset? Can we be in distinction-drawer
mode collectively? How do we convince colleagues who don't bother with first
principles reasoning?

Distinction-drawer mode can start very simply, like [Jay Rosen
explains](https://twitter.com/jayrosen_nyu/status/1363669902238900225). "When in
doubt, draw a distinction." This is the complete opposite of what we're usually
doing in software when facing an architecture issue.

Instead of trying to group things together or add things over existing things,

> let's try to find how to separate them in a way that make the more sense,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
let's try to find how to separate them in a way that makes the most sense,
```

---
title: Distinction Drawer 

draft: false

page : false

image: 

excerpt: What it means to be a distinction-drawer in software engineering?

---

Earlier this week Margin Fowler shared the idea of been a "distinction drawer"
in software and it immediately clicked. I realised that being in

> distinction-drawer mode is a part I like a lot in my job as a software engineer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Earlier this week Martin Fowler revealed who he was all along. Turns out, he sees himself a "distinction drawer"
in software. The confession immediately clicked for me. I realised that being in
this distinction-drawer mode is something I like a lot in my job as a software engineer.
```

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet">
  <p lang="en" dir="ltr">
I like to think of myself as a distinction drawer in software<br><br>Here is a
true master-distinction-drawer, in a field where it&#39;s really needed at the
moment. Finding differences in terms that are &quot;sufficiently close that
prying them apart clears space for thought&quot; <a
href="https://t.co/ZnCiZinmE3">https://t.co/ZnCiZinmE3</a>
  </p>
  &mdash; Martin Fowler (@martinfowler) <a href="https://twitter.com/martinfowler/status/1363847064317263876?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">February 22, 2021</a>
</blockquote>

> What it means to be in distinction-drawer mode?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What does it mean to be in distinction-drawer mode?
```

We're in distinction-drawer mode when we take a step back from the day to day
activity of writing code and start reasoning about what we're doing. While doing
so, we deconstruct the bigger picture our code is inserted into. We're thinking

> "meta".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're in this distinction-drawer mode when we take a step back from the day to day
activity of writing code and start reasoning about what we're doing. While doing
so, we see our current bit code as a tiny cog working in a larger machine. We're thinking
"meta". We draw a distinction between what we do now, and what we do *period*.
```

Author: ```suggestion
We're in this distinction-drawer mode when we take a step back from the day to day
activity of writing code and start reasoning about what we're doing. While doing
so, we see our current bit code as a tiny cog distinct from other parts of the larger machine. We're thinking
"meta". 
```

We're also in distinction-drawer mode when, tasked with working on specs for a
new feature, we use our knowledge to articulate how the feature could be build

> upon multiple logical parts of the codebase talking to each other.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we're writing specs for a
new feature, using our knowledge to articulate how this feature could be built
upon multiple logical parts of the codebase talking to each other, then we should also be in distincting-drawer mode.
```

Author: ```suggestion
When we're writing specs for a
new feature, using our knowledge to articulate how this feature could be built
upon multiple logical parts of the codebase talking to each other, then we're also in this distincting-drawer mode.
```

What logical modules can we draw? How such thing combine with such thing? What
is the fondamental responsibility of this? What concepts should we bring

> together to do that?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What logical distinctions can we draw? How do we combine things with one another? How do we avoid making false equivalencies? What
are the fundamental responsibilities at play? What concepts should we bring
together to reach our goal? Making strong, identified distinctions will help us build both a strong new feature, but it will also enable us to preserve the "machine" as well.
```

Imagine a gardener taking a step back from the flowerbed he's working on to
decide what to do next. Should he plants this flower here or here? and why? To
answer that without heading down his first intuition, he uses his own

> knowledge, what he has learned over the years and the rules of gardening.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine a gardener having to plant a new flower, stepping back from the flowerbed to
decide what's the next step. Where will the flower go? And why there? To
answer that without relying only on a possibly flawed intuition, the gardener uses years of previous experiences as well as the general rules of gardening.
```

Reviewer: Fully non genré :D

It's how, by having this moment of thought, the gardener is placing his work
into the idea of what the garden should be. An idea that is both clearer and
stronger because he has taken this step back to think a little more about how

> everything should be combined in the garden, and why.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This moment of thought, this step back has a purpose. It enables the gardner to stop focusing on the single flower, seeing the whole garden instead. With this point of view, finding how the new flower can be combined with the existing plants becomes easier. The gardener can now see where, and why. It triggers the distinction-drawer mode. Can the flower go here? No it can't because it's not the right color. Can it go there? The surrounding flowers are the right color, but much taller, it would ruin the new one. Drawing distinctions is acknowledging a flower is not a garden.
```

The distinction-drawer mode should not confused with small talk about our work.
It's nothing like when we're taking a pause from coding, having a coffee with a

> colleague and sharing how our tasks are doing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should not be confused with "philosophical talk" or over-engineering.
It's nothing like when we're taking a pause from coding, having a coffee with a
colleague and sharing how our tasks are doing.
```

Author: ```suggestion
It should not be confused with when we're just taking a pause from coding. It's nothing like having a coffee with a colleague and sharing how our tasks are doing.
```

It's more about using the ideas we collected from technical books we've read,
technical discussion we add, common patterns we've seen over the years working
on different codebases to understand better what is at stake in what we're

> doing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's about using the ideas we collected from technical books we've read,
technical discussion we had, common patterns we've seen over the years working
on different codebases to understand better what is at stake in what we're
doing. It is actual work, maybe the most important part of it even.
```

It's [seeking the
truth](https://twitter.com/ericnormand/status/1313854365741076480). We're
bringing concepts and models on the table to reason from [first
principles](https://jamesclear.com/first-principles).

Doing so, we try to find the fundamentals principles hidden behind our code. We
reason about responsibilities and bondaries. Where is the code [dealing with
*state*](http://localhost:4000/tech/posts/2020-11-22-state-store-in-frontend-codebases)?
How do we *store* data? When are we doing *requests* to other services? How to

> represent *permissions*? What is the responsibility of the *view*?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Doing so, we try to find the fundamentals principles hidden behind our code. We
reason about responsibilities and boundaries. Where is the code [dealing with
*state*](http://localhost:4000/tech/posts/2020-11-22-state-store-in-frontend-codebases)?
How do we *store* data? When are we doing *requests* to other services? How to
represent *permissions*? What is the responsibility of the *view*?
```

> We're *distinguishing* logical parts from each other, forming a modularised
> picture in our head (and at one point on paper, hopefully) where each module has
> a clear and strong role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We're *distinguishing* logical parts from each other, forming a modularised
picture in our head (and at one point on paper, hopefully) where each part has
a clear and strong role.
```

> Coming back to our code with such a picture in mind help us articulate better
> what we're doing. We now know *this thing* should be put *here*, but *this
> other thing* should be done *here* and we know how to explain it to our
> colleagues. It looks like nothing but it's extremely powerful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Coming back to our code with such a picture in mind helps us better articulate
what we're doing. We now know *this thing* should be put *here*, but *this
other thing* should be done *here* and we know how to explain it to our
colleagues. It looks like nothing but it's extremely powerful.
```

Sometimes it's real Eureka! moments.

> A lot could probably be added on this curious topic. Can someone always be in
> distinction-drawer mode, disconnected from the raw material of the codebase?
> What ressources to grow such a mindset? Can we be in distinction-drawer mode
> collectively? How to convince a colleague that doesn't want to bother with first
> principles reasoning?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot could probably be added on this curious topic. Can someone always be in
distinction-drawer mode, disconnected from the raw, immediate code?
Which resources can be used to grow such a mindset? Can we be in distinction-drawer mode
collectively? How do we convince colleagues who don't bother with first
principles reasoning?
```
